{\rtf1\ansi\deff0
{\fonttbl{\f0 Calibri;}{\f1 Courier New;}}
\fs24
\b 4.1 Qualitative Analysis of Enhancement Results on EUVP Samples\par
\b0\par
This section presents a qualitative analysis of the enhancement results obtained from the three models on selected EUVP samples. For each model, the qualitative comparison is based on the triplet-grid visualization containing the Input, Preprocessed, and Enhanced images. The purpose of this discussion is to examine the restoration behaviour of each model in terms of brightness correction, colour balance, contrast recovery, and preservation of scene details. In addition, a challenging paired EUVP case is included for Models 1 and 2 to discuss model robustness and limitations in a more demanding visual setting.\par
\par
\b 4.1.1 Model 1\par
\b0\par
Figure placeholder:\par
[Insert Model 1 qualitative triplet grid here]\par
\f1 C:\Users\ASUS\Desktop\FINAL FOLDER\clean_repo\results\euvp_triplet_grids\model1_euvp_triplet_grid.png\f0\par
\par
Model 1 represents the baseline encoder-decoder CNN architecture. The qualitative results show that this model is capable of improving the visual quality of underwater images, although the overall enhancement remains relatively conservative when compared with the later models. The triplet-grid results indicate that the model is able to recover visibility and partially correct underwater colour distortion, but the strength of restoration remains moderate.\par
\par
In the low-light sample, the enhanced output shows improved brightness and better visibility of the squid subject. The red and orange regions become more noticeable after enhancement, and the foreground subject becomes clearer against the dark underwater background. However, the enhancement is still controlled in nature, and some shadowed regions remain visually heavy. This suggests that Model 1 can recover basic scene visibility, but its ability to produce strong local contrast enhancement is limited.\par
\par
In the greenish-cast sample, Model 1 reduces the dominant green tone and partially restores the visual appearance of the seabed and coral-like structures. The enhanced output appears less distorted than the input, and the scene becomes easier to interpret. Even so, a mild residual green tint is still visible, which indicates that the baseline model does not completely neutralize strong underwater colour cast. The correction is meaningful, but not aggressive.\par
\par
In the blur or low-contrast sample, the model improves the visibility of the shark and slightly strengthens the contrast between the subject and the blue background. The shark outline becomes somewhat clearer, and the scene appears less faded than in the input image. Nevertheless, the output still preserves some softness, and the restoration of fine edge sharpness remains modest.\par
\par
From these observations, it can be inferred that Model 1 provides stable baseline enhancement. It improves brightness, recovers part of the lost colour information, and modestly strengthens contrast. However, its restoration remains restrained, especially in cases involving severe colour cast, weak local detail, or strong low-contrast degradation.\par
\par
Figure placeholder:\par
[Insert Model 1 challenging case here]\par
\f1 C:\Users\ASUS\Desktop\FINAL FOLDER\clean_repo\results\euvp_challenging_case\model1_euvp_challenging_case.png\f0\par
\par
The challenging paired EUVP case further highlights both the robustness and limitations of Model 1. In this example, the scene contains dense coral texture, a strong blue underwater cast, and wide colour variation, making the restoration task more difficult. Model 1 demonstrates robustness by improving the overall brightness and bringing back some of the warmer coral tones that are subdued in the input image. The separation between the foreground reef structure and the background water also becomes somewhat clearer after enhancement.\par
\par
At the same time, the limitations of the model are visible in the incomplete restoration of fine structural detail and colour depth. Compared with the ground truth image, the enhanced output remains softer and less detailed, especially in the textured coral regions. The colour correction is present, but the output does not fully recover the richness and clarity visible in the reference image. Therefore, the challenging case shows that Model 1 is reliable for basic improvement, but it is less effective when the input contains complex textures and stronger underwater distortion.\par
\par
\b 4.1.2 Model 2\par
\b0\par
Figure placeholder:\par
[Insert Model 2 qualitative triplet grid here]\par
\f1 C:\Users\ASUS\Desktop\FINAL FOLDER\clean_repo\results\euvp_triplet_grids\model2_euvp_triplet_grid.png\f0\par
\par
Model 2 extends the baseline CNN by incorporating a bottleneck layer, allowing the network to learn a stronger intermediate feature representation before image reconstruction. The qualitative outputs show that this model produces a more pronounced enhancement than Model 1, particularly in terms of contrast strengthening and colour restoration.\par
\par
In the low-light sample, the squid appears brighter and more visually prominent than in the baseline output. The red body region becomes more vivid, and the contrast between the subject and the background water improves more clearly. This suggests that the bottleneck representation helps the model learn stronger luminance and structure information before decoding.\par
\par
In the greenish-cast sample, Model 2 performs a more visible reduction of the green underwater tint. The foreground objects become easier to distinguish, and the scene appears more natural than in the input image. Sandy and coral-like tones are recovered more clearly than in Model 1. Although a slight residual tint may still remain, the overall correction is stronger and more visually balanced.\par
\par
In the blur or low-contrast sample, the shark becomes more distinguishable from the surrounding water, and the image shows better tonal separation. The enhancement is more noticeable than in the baseline model, particularly in the subject silhouette and foreground-background contrast. The underwater blue appearance is preserved, but the overall scene readability is improved.\par
\par
These observations indicate that Model 2 provides a better tradeoff between structural preservation and enhancement strength. Compared with Model 1, it produces stronger contrast, better colour recovery, and clearer object-background separation. The bottleneck layer appears to improve the model's ability to represent important underwater features before reconstruction.\par
\par
Figure placeholder:\par
[Insert Model 2 challenging case here]\par
\f1 C:\Users\ASUS\Desktop\FINAL FOLDER\clean_repo\results\euvp_challenging_case\model2_euvp_challenging_case.png\f0\par
\par
The challenging paired example provides a clearer view of the behaviour of Model 2 under more difficult restoration conditions. In this case, the model shows robustness by recovering stronger colour contrast and producing a more visible enhancement of the coral region than the baseline model. The foreground structure becomes clearer, and the warmer colours within the reef are restored more effectively. This indicates that the bottleneck-based representation helps the network respond better to images with complex colour and texture variation.\par
\par
However, the limitations of Model 2 can still be observed when it is compared with the ground truth image. Some detailed textures remain softened, and the restored output does not fully match the depth and crispness of the paired reference. While the enhancement is stronger than that of Model 1, certain regions still appear visually simplified. Thus, Model 2 is more robust than the baseline model in difficult scenes, but it still does not fully recover all fine-grained details and natural scene richness.\par
\par
\b 4.1.3 Model 3\par
\b0\par
Figure placeholder:\par
[Insert Model 3 qualitative triplet grid here]\par
\f1 C:\Users\ASUS\Desktop\FINAL FOLDER\clean_repo\results\euvp_triplet_grids\model3_euvp_triplet_grid.png\f0\par
\par
Model 3 is the hybrid CNN-based enhancement model that combines convolutional feature extraction with a MobileViT-style bottleneck and skip connections. Among the three models, this model produces the strongest and most visually consistent enhancement across the selected EUVP examples. The outputs indicate better restoration of colour balance, stronger contrast recovery, and improved subject-background separation.\par
\par
In the low-light sample, Model 3 gives the clearest restoration of the squid subject. The body becomes brighter, more saturated, and more sharply separated from the background. Red and orange tones are restored more strongly than in the previous models, while the background remains visually coherent with the underwater setting. This makes the subject appear more prominent and visually better recovered.\par
\par
In the greenish-cast sample, the improvement is especially noticeable. The strong green colour dominance in the input image is reduced substantially, and the enhanced result recovers more neutral sandy and brownish tones in the seabed region. The image appears more natural and balanced, and the scene becomes easier to interpret. Compared with the previous models, Model 3 shows the most effective correction of underwater colour cast in this example.\par
\par
In the blur or low-contrast sample, Model 3 preserves the natural underwater blue tone while improving contrast and making the shark more visually distinct. The subject-background separation is clearer than in the outputs of Models 1 and 2, and the tonal variation across the image becomes stronger. Although the original softness is not removed completely, the enhancement offers a better balance between clarity improvement and natural appearance.\par
\par
These observations suggest that Model 3 performs the most complete restoration among the three studied models. It produces stronger colour correction, better local contrast enhancement, and clearer subject emphasis across all three degradation types. The qualitative behaviour indicates that the hybrid feature representation allows the model to capture both local structure and broader contextual information more effectively than the simpler CNN-based variants.\par
\par
\b Overall Comparative Inference\par
\b0\par
The qualitative comparison across the three models reveals a clear progression in enhancement capability. Model 1 provides the baseline level of restoration and demonstrates that a simple encoder-decoder CNN can improve underwater image visibility. Model 2 strengthens the restoration through the use of a bottleneck representation, leading to better contrast and colour recovery. Model 3 provides the strongest qualitative enhancement, with more convincing colour restoration, improved contrast balance, and better subject-background separation across the selected EUVP samples.\par
\par
Therefore, the qualitative analysis supports the broader performance trend observed during evaluation: the enhancement becomes progressively stronger and more visually effective from Model 1 to Model 3, with the hybrid model showing the most consistent restoration quality across different underwater degradation conditions.\par
}
