{\rtf1\ansi\deff0
{\fonttbl{\f0 Times New Roman;}{\f1 Arial;}}
\fs24
\b 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION (PPT READY)\b0\par
\par
This version is simplified for presentation slides. It keeps only the most important findings, avoids heavy theory, and focuses on visible results, key numbers, and clear conclusions.\par
\par
\b What To Include In The PPT\b0\par
1. Qualitative comparison of Model 1, Model 2, and Model 3 on EUVP samples.\par
2. Quantitative comparison table using UCIQE, UIQM, PSNR, and SSIM.\par
3. One failure case and one over-enhancement case for Model 3.\par
4. Cross-domain examples from UIEB and RUIE.\par
5. Short ablation study showing the effect of edge loss and color loss.\par
6. Final takeaway slide: Model 2 is best balanced, Model 3 is best visually.\par
\par
\b 4.1 Visual Enhancement For Quality Comparison\b0\par
\par
\b Slide Title Suggestion:\b0 Qualitative Comparison of the Three Models\par
\par
\b Figure suggestions:\b0\par
- Model 1 triplet grid: results/euvp_triplet_grids/model1_euvp_triplet_grid.png\par
- Model 2 triplet grid: results/euvp_triplet_grids/model2_euvp_triplet_grid.png\par
- Model 3 triplet grid: results/euvp_triplet_grids/model3_euvp_triplet_grid.png\par
- 4-panel random comparison: results/samples/random_model_comparison_grid_v2.png\par
\par
\b Short slide bullets:\b0\par
- Model 1 improves brightness and visibility, but enhancement is conservative.\par
- Model 2 gives stronger contrast and better color correction than Model 1.\par
- Model 3 gives the strongest visual enhancement and the clearest subject-background separation.\par
- Overall visual quality improves progressively from Model 1 to Model 3.\par
\par
\b Model 1 key point:\b0 Good baseline enhancement, but weaker color correction and detail recovery.\par
\b Model 2 key point:\b0 Better contrast and better balance between enhancement and structure preservation.\par
\b Model 3 key point:\b0 Best visual restoration across low-light, green-cast, and low-contrast examples.\par
\par
\b Optional presenter line:\b0 "Qualitatively, the results show a clear progression: Model 1 provides basic improvement, Model 2 strengthens contrast and color recovery, and Model 3 produces the strongest and most consistent enhancement."\par
\par
\b 4.1.1 Challenging Case Examples\b0\par
\par
\b Figure suggestions:\b0\par
- Model 1 challenging case: results/euvp_challenging_case/model1_euvp_challenging_case.png\par
- Model 2 challenging case: results/euvp_challenging_case/model2_euvp_challenging_case.png\par
- Model 3 challenging case: results/euvp_challenging_case/model3_euvp_challenging_case.png\par
\par
\b Short slide bullets:\b0\par
- Model 1 improves brightness but leaves the coral texture softer than the reference.\par
- Model 2 restores stronger color contrast and clearer reef structure than Model 1.\par
- Model 3 gives the strongest restoration, but the paired comparison also shows that difficult scenes remain challenging.\par
\par
\b 4.2 Quantitative Evaluation\b0\par
\par
\b Slide Title Suggestion:\b0 Quantitative Performance on EUVP\par
\par
\b Table to use:\b0\par
\par
Model\tab No-Ref N\tab Paired N\tab UCIQE After\tab UIQM After\tab PSNR\tab SSIM\par
Model 1\tab 130\tab 218\tab 5.7979\tab 0.6031\tab 26.1530\tab 0.8544\par
Model 2\tab 130\tab 218\tab 6.0396\tab 0.6297\tab 26.5912\tab 0.8592\par
Model 3\tab 130\tab 218\tab 6.4122\tab 0.6757\tab 23.7551\tab 0.8639\par
\par
\b Short slide bullets:\b0\par
- All three models improve UCIQE and UIQM after enhancement.\par
- Model 2 achieves the highest PSNR: 26.5912.\par
- Model 3 achieves the highest UCIQE: 6.4122, highest UIQM: 0.6757, and highest SSIM: 0.8639.\par
- Model 3 gives the strongest perceptual improvement, but PSNR is lower than Models 1 and 2.\par
\par
\b Main interpretation for PPT:\b0\par
- Model 1: baseline improvement.\par
- Model 2: best balanced model.\par
- Model 3: best perceptual and structural enhancement.\par
\par
\b One-line conclusion for the slide:\b0 "Model 2 is the best compromise between fidelity and enhancement, while Model 3 is best for visual quality."\par
\par
\b 4.3 Analytical Result\b0\par
\par
\b Slide Title Suggestion:\b0 Failure and Over-Enhancement Analysis\par
\par
\b Figure suggestions:\b0\par
- Failure case: results/section_4_3_analytical/model3_failure_case_ruie_0316.png\par
- Over-enhancement case: results/section_4_3_analytical/model3_overenhancement_case_uieb_94_img.png\par
\par
\b Failure case bullets:\b0\par
- RUIE UTTS sample 0316 shows a difficult scene with weak structure and suspended particles.\par
- Model 3 produces a grainy and harsh output instead of a clean restoration.\par
- UCIQE drops from 2.5593 to 2.2954.\par
- UIQM drops from 0.4732 to 0.4629.\par
\par
\b Over-enhancement bullets:\b0\par
- UIEB sample 94_img_.png already has relatively good visibility before enhancement.\par
- Model 3 makes the seabed darker and warmer than necessary.\par
- PSNR drops from 42.9551 to 17.3028.\par
- SSIM drops from 0.9993 to 0.7674.\par
- UCIQE drops from 10.4401 to 9.3043.\par
- UIQM drops from 0.5331 to 0.4993.\par
\par
\b Main message for this slide:\b0\par
- Model 3 is the strongest model overall, but it can fail in highly degraded scenes and can over-enhance already good images.\par
\par
\b 4.4 Cross-Domain Evaluation\b0\par
\par
\b Slide Title Suggestion:\b0 Cross-Domain Generalization on UIEB and RUIE\par
\par
\b Figure suggestion:\b0\par
- Cross-domain figure: results/figures/cross_domain_4panel.png\par
\par
\b Short slide bullets:\b0\par
- The model was trained on EUVP but also tested on unseen UIEB and RUIE images.\par
- Visual results show better brightness, contrast, and color balance across different underwater scenes.\par
- UIEB examples show clearer marine objects and better foreground-background separation.\par
- RUIE examples also improve, but performance is less stable for very dark low-light scenes.\par
- This shows reasonable cross-domain generalization beyond the training dataset.\par
\par
\b One-line conclusion for the slide:\b0 "The proposed model generalizes well to unseen underwater datasets, although extreme low-light cases remain difficult."\par
\par
\b 4.5 Ablation Study\b0\par
\par
\b Slide Title Suggestion:\b0 Effect of Edge Loss and Color Loss\par
\par
\b Table to use:\b0\par
\par
Configuration\tab L1\tab Edge\tab Color\tab Validation UCIQE\tab Validation UIQM\par
Full loss (L1 + Edge + Color)\tab 0.6\tab 0.3\tab 0.1\tab 5.7861\tab 0.6396\par
No edge loss (L1 + Color)\tab 0.9\tab 0.0\tab 0.1\tab 5.8069\tab 0.6121\par
No color loss (L1 + Edge)\tab 0.7\tab 0.3\tab 0.0\tab 5.7676\tab 0.6494\par
\par
\b Short slide bullets:\b0\par
- Full loss gives the most balanced overall performance.\par
- Removing edge loss slightly increases UCIQE, but reduces UIQM.\par
- Removing color loss slightly increases UIQM, but reduces UCIQE.\par
- This shows that both edge loss and color loss contribute useful information.\par
\par
\b Main conclusion for the slide:\b0 "The hybrid loss is kept because it gives the most stable tradeoff between clarity and color consistency."\par
\par
\b Final Result Summary Slide\b0\par
\par
\b Slide Title Suggestion:\b0 Key Findings\par
\par
- All three models improve underwater image quality.\par
- Model 1 provides baseline enhancement.\par
- Model 2 gives the best balanced quantitative performance.\par
- Model 3 gives the best qualitative enhancement and highest perceptual scores.\par
- Model 3 also shows some failure and over-enhancement behavior in difficult cases.\par
- Cross-domain results confirm reasonable generalization to UIEB and RUIE.\par
- The hybrid loss is the most stable loss setting in the ablation study.\par
\par
\b Best Short Closing Statement For Your PPT\b0\par
"Overall, the project shows that enhancement quality improves from Model 1 to Model 3. Model 2 is the best balanced model, while Model 3 gives the strongest visual enhancement and the best perceptual quality."\par
}
